---
title: "Estimation of minimum foot clearance using a single foot_mounted inertial sensor and personalized foot geometry scan"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-06-13-MFC_Scan
date: 2024-06-13
venue: 'Scientific Reports'
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-63124-6'
citation: 'Fehr, K. H., Bartloff, J. N., Wang, Y., Hetzel, S., &amp; Adamczyk, P. G. (2024). Estimation of minimum foot clearance using a single foot-mounted inertial sensor and personalized foot geometry scan. Scientific Reports, 14(1), 13640. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-63124-6'
---

<a href='https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-63124-6'>Download paper here</a>

The real-world measurement of minimum foot clearance (mFC) during the swing phase of gait is critical in efforts to understand and reduce the risk of trip-and-fall incidents in populations with gait impairments. Past research has focused on measuring clearance of a single point on a person&apos;s foot, typically the toe&apos;however, this may overestimate mFC and may even be the wrong region of the foot in cases of gait impairments or interventions. In this work, we present a novel method to reconstruct the swing-phase trajectory of an arbitrary number of points on a person&apos;s shoe and estimate the instantaneous height and location of whole-foot mFC. This is achieved using a single foot-mounted inertial sensor and personalized shoe geometry scan, assuming a rigid-body IMU-shoe system. This combination allows collection and analysis using out-of-lab tests, potentially including clinical environments. Validation of single marker location using the proposed method vs. motion capture showed height errors with bias less than 0.05 mm, and 95% confidence interval of _ 8.18 to +_8.09 mm. The method is demonstrated in an example data set comparing different interventions for foot drop, and it shows clear differences among no intervention, functional electrical stimulation, and ankle&apos;foot orthosis conditions. This method offers researchers and clinicians a rich understanding of a person&apos;s gait by providing objective 3D foot kinematics and allowing a unique opportunity to view the regions of the foot where minimum clearance occurs. This information can contribute to a more informed recommendation of specific interventions or assistive technology than is currently possible in standard clinical practice.

Recommended citation: Fehr, K. H., Bartloff, J. N., Wang, Y., Hetzel, S., & Adamczyk, P. G. (2024). Estimation of minimum foot clearance using a single foot-mounted inertial sensor and personalized foot geometry scan. Scientific Reports, 14(1), 13640. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-63124-6